All right.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon.
So yesterday I talked about this useful property of circuits
NOTE CONF
that they can use the same output more than once.
And we can think of doing the same thing with
NOTE CONF
formulae.
So yesterday we ended up with a circuit looking like
NOTE CONF
this.
And we gave additional variable names to the outputs of
NOTE CONF
all the gates, wrote it down like that and got
an equal satisfiable formula.
NOTE CONF
So if we can make the original circuit output true
by putting appropriate values for A, B and c, then
NOTE CONF
we can make this bunch of formulae all true together
by choosing appropriate values.
NOTE CONF
And we discussed a bit at the end that all
these variables that we've introduced are not really giving any
NOTE CONF
new information because they're all precisely defined in terms of
the original variables, but they allow us to reduce the
NOTE CONF
complexity of the formulae we're looking at, and that will
be made precise in a moment.
NOTE CONF
I asked you yesterday to go through these slides and
come back with any questions or clarifications that you wanted
NOTE CONF
before we finish off with the actual formula work.
Are there any questions?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so the point of the circuits is actually to
do the logic.
NOTE CONF
So the setting transformation does with formulae what we've just
done with gates and the idea is, if you think
NOTE CONF
of every bracket in a formula as being a gate.
When I drew gates, they were binary gates and or
NOTE CONF
nor.
We can do exactly the same thing with formulae.
NOTE CONF
When you draw out, write out a formula with all
its brackets.
NOTE CONF
Then every bracket corresponds to a logic gate.
So if we look at a formula, we can simply
NOTE CONF
give a label to every bracket inside it and define
a new variable.
NOTE CONF
It says see live demo here.
So this is where we hope that things still work
NOTE CONF
after yesterday.
So here's a formula.
NOTE CONF
It's not quite the same formula as on the previous
slide.
NOTE CONF
It's got a few other operators on it.
This is as big as I can get.
NOTE CONF
Can you read it at the back.
Yep.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this formula says it's the negation of a
implies b and c or not a no, c or
NOTE CONF
not a, of course, is also known as a implies
c, so I'm just ringing the changes by using different
NOTE CONF
boolean operators to make it look a little bit more
complicated than it is.
NOTE CONF
If I look at this as a formula, it's only
got one outside operator the and which combines these two.
NOTE CONF
So if we take the circuit idea, what we will
end up doing is giving a name to the formula
NOTE CONF
A implies B and a name to the formula C
or not A, and then define those new names to
NOTE CONF
be equivalent by directionally equivalent to the original formula.
And with a bit of luck.
NOTE CONF
I get those formulae.
Um, I'm doing this automatically, of course, which means I
NOTE CONF
have to make choices for variable names.
And since I use all sorts of letters as variable
NOTE CONF
names, I decided that the right thing to do here
is to use the letter C, which is the first
NOTE CONF
letter of setting as my root variable, and then the
other variables are called say 00001, according to which way
NOTE CONF
I'm going in the tree.
It makes it nice and easy to program the creation
NOTE CONF
of variable names, as well as Honoré honouring the inventor.
So if I apply the transformation to this formula, what
NOTE CONF
do I get?
I get this thing, say, which is the whole formula,
NOTE CONF
and then I get the whole formula is equivalent to
not of this bracket, whole bracket, which is say zero.
NOTE CONF
And then what is say zero?
Well, say zero is the end of the two things
NOTE CONF
either side of it, so that say zero zero and
say zero one.
NOTE CONF
What?
Say zero zero.
NOTE CONF
Well, it's defined b a implies b and likewise say
zero one is in defined b c or not a.
NOTE CONF
So that's given me a bunch of 4 million.
If I make all these true at once, then I've
NOTE CONF
made the original formula true and found a satisfying assignment
for A, B, and C that makes phi true.
NOTE CONF
And coincidentally, I've also got values for the other formulae,
but they're determined anyway.
NOTE CONF
Now yesterday I said, why is this a win?
We talked a bit about yesterday.
NOTE CONF
What happens if you take an arbitrary formula and try
to convert it to DNF to CNF using Boolean algebra?
NOTE CONF
And if you remember yesterday, the procedure for converting stuff
to boot to CNF with Boolean algebra was get rid
NOTE CONF
of the implication and by implication, push negation inward.
Distribute until you push all the ORS inside all the
NOTE CONF
ands.
And that could be a big lose, because if you
NOTE CONF
have a big bunch of all of ands inside a
bunch of ores, you do a lot of distribution and
NOTE CONF
the formula blows up in size.
When we do this transformation, what we've done is produce
NOTE CONF
a bunch of formulae, all of which are short.
So because I give a new label to every bracket
NOTE CONF
in the formula, there are never more than two variables
on the right hand side of this by implication.
NOTE CONF
So every formula I produce as the output of sesshin
is a free variable formula, which means that if I
NOTE CONF
convert it to CNF, it can't blow up very much.
Um, so now what we have is a bunch of
NOTE CONF
formulae Which are satisfiable with our original thing.
And if we make them all true, so we make
NOTE CONF
the end of them true, then we've made the original
thing true.
NOTE CONF
So now what we do is say, well, I want
to take the end of all these things.
NOTE CONF
So for each one of these formulae, then I'm going
to convert it to CNF and then just end them
NOTE CONF
all together.
So my the output of certain looks like.
NOTE CONF
A bunch of formulae with bi implications.
And I'm just going to convert each one of them
NOTE CONF
to CNF.
Which means it looks like that and and of AWS.
NOTE CONF
And if I take an and of a bunch of
CNF formulae, then I still have a CNCF formally.
NOTE CONF
And because all these formally on the right hand side
are very short, that means I end up with a
NOTE CONF
CNCF formula, all of whose clauses are small.
And that's good because that means GPL probably runs quite
NOTE CONF
quickly.
I say probably because there's no guarantee.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I said that what we do is convert
all these formula to CNF.
NOTE CONF
Well, if I do that, what happens?
I get a formula that looks like that.
NOTE CONF
So you'll see that the original outermost formula stays the
same.
NOTE CONF
And then there's a bunch of formulae which have been
converted in various ways.
NOTE CONF
This is slightly tedious to do manually, and it's looking
quite long, right?
NOTE CONF
It's looking a good deal longer than the original formula,
but it's not too bad.
NOTE CONF
Does this look like it's a win?
Somebody thinks it does look like a win.
NOTE CONF
It's not very obviously a win at this stage, is
it?
NOTE CONF
Because is this formula easier to solve than just converting
this to CNF directly?
NOTE CONF
Um, I mean, if I convert.
The original thing to CNF directly, it looks like that.
NOTE CONF
So this this is doing CNF by the procedure with
Boolean algebra.
NOTE CONF
So I'm taking my original Phi which has just gone
off the screen hasn't it.
NOTE CONF
So I'm taking my original file and just pushing negation
in and distributing appropriately.
NOTE CONF
I get four clause formula.
When I did the session transformation.
NOTE CONF
I've got this rather longer formulae formula which does not
look as if it's a win.
NOTE CONF
However, sometimes it's quite a large win.
So to demonstrate that, I'll show you a different formula.
NOTE CONF
Um.
This formula is not all that long, but it's got,
NOTE CONF
what, 12 variables in it.
Assuming I've used the alphabet correctly and it has a
NOTE CONF
structure which might look a bit worrying.
So I've got lots of ands on the inside, so
NOTE CONF
I've got ants on the inside and lots of ors
joining them together.
NOTE CONF
So how long do you think this formula is going
to get?
NOTE CONF
If I convert it to CNF just by the kind
of manipulation that we did yesterday?
NOTE CONF
If anybody advances, I don't know.
I mean, let's just do it right.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's see if I can scroll back and find
the beginning.
NOTE CONF
So three screens full.
Um, which is perhaps a little bit surprising, but it's
NOTE CONF
a demonstration of how this.
Short formula.
NOTE CONF
By the time you've pushed all the ands, all the
ORS inside all the ands and distribute it over them,
NOTE CONF
you get three screens fulls of clauses.
On the other hand, if I do set in to
NOTE CONF
it.
Then that, of course, just introduces a bunch of new
NOTE CONF
variables, and I get something more or less the same
length as I started with.
NOTE CONF
And then if I apply, if I convert all these
clauses individually to normal form, none of them are long,
NOTE CONF
so nothing is going to blow up.
So I get one screen for PSI one and a
NOTE CONF
half screen fulls of shorter formulae.
These are small examples.
NOTE CONF
Now imagine the difference when there were 10,000 variables in
the clauses in the formula.
NOTE CONF
The difference is between completely impossible and maybe possible.
If you go on to do some of our later
NOTE CONF
courses, you will find how this technique is useful for
proving interesting complexity theoretic results, but we're not going to
NOTE CONF
talk about that here.
So what I've just done is show you that with
NOTE CONF
particularly nasty formula formulae, when you convert it to CNF
by doing straightforward manipulation, the formula blows up exponentially in
NOTE CONF
the true sense of the word, while the section transformation
of it is only growing up linearly as the formula
NOTE CONF
gets bigger.
Um, which is much of the time very good.
NOTE CONF
I have to say that it still doesn't solve all
the problems.
NOTE CONF
What have I done?
Settings.
NOTE CONF
Transformation is a linear order n conversion of a formula
to an satisfiable CNF formula, which is a great deal
NOTE CONF
better than converting your formula to an exponentially bigger formula.
But it doesn't guarantee that you can find a satisfying
NOTE CONF
assignment quickly, because finding a satisfying assignment is still an
exponentially difficult problem anyway.
NOTE CONF
But it does at least remove one source of exponential
blow up.
NOTE CONF
Um, why have I been talking about formula in CNF?
How long does it take to check satisfiability of a
NOTE CONF
DNF formula?
Would that be easier?
NOTE CONF
DNF formula looks like that.
If I'm looking for assignments of the variable that make
NOTE CONF
it true.
What would it be enough to do?
NOTE CONF
Find one clause.
So on the face of it, it looks as if
NOTE CONF
it's a bit dumb to be looking at CNF.
Why am I looking at CNF?
NOTE CONF
If I have a formula in DNF, then I can
just go through the clauses one at a time, and
NOTE CONF
then each clause looks like A and B and not
D, and it's easy to see how to make that
NOTE CONF
true.
You just have to make all of them true.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so in this case I would have to make
a true, b true and d false.
NOTE CONF
So if you give me a formula in DNF, what's
the complexity of finding a satisfying assignment.
NOTE CONF
Linnea just go through it one clause at a time.
If you can make any clause true, the whole thing
NOTE CONF
is true.
So you're done.
NOTE CONF
So is it the case that I've wasted your time
for an hour and a half by telling you something
NOTE CONF
useless?
Probably not, because we wouldn't do that.
NOTE CONF
So why is it not a solution to say, well,
put all your formula in DNF if you want to
NOTE CONF
find a satisfying assignment.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
It's not satisfiable.
That does not exist, right?
NOTE CONF
I mean, if the formula is not satisfiable, then you
will find that you can't satisfy any clause because there's
NOTE CONF
a contradiction in every subclause in some subclause of every
clause.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So I said, just put everything into DNF, as if
NOTE CONF
that's easy.
Is it easy to put any formula into DNF?
NOTE CONF
No.
There's the magic word, which comes up very frequently to
NOTE CONF
explain why that's an obvious statement.
DNF and CNF are completely symmetrical.
NOTE CONF
That's the lovely thing about logic and an or completely
symmetrical.
NOTE CONF
If it is hard to put a formula into CNF
because it might blow up exponentially, then it's also hard
NOTE CONF
to put a formula into DNF because it might blow
up exponentially.
NOTE CONF
And the key difference is that with CNF, we have
this setting transformation, which can reduce the chance of hitting
NOTE CONF
a formula that is going to blow up.
And there's no equivalent of this for DNF and advanced
NOTE CONF
exercises.
Go and look into that and see if you can
NOTE CONF
work out why.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So this is as much as we're going to do
about the hard problem of finding satisfying assignments.
NOTE CONF
Let me emphasise that finding satisfying assignments to a formula
is a very, very practically important problem, because any other
NOTE CONF
propositional logic problem and many, many other kinds of problems
can be turned into finding a satisfying assignment.
NOTE CONF
So I mentioned timetabling, but there are countless others, and
there is a big industry in trying to do it
NOTE CONF
faster.
So I've told you that we know.
NOTE CONF
No.
Well, I've told you that we don't know whether we
NOTE CONF
can't do it.
We believe we can't do it efficiently.
NOTE CONF
In the general case, we don't know because that's P
equals NP.
NOTE CONF
But there's an enormous industry in trying to find algorithms
that are slightly faster.
NOTE CONF
In particular cases where the problem has a nice property
and there are competitions every year, and people try to
NOTE CONF
do slightly better than everybody else according to various benchmarks.
Not something that has ever interested me, but some people
NOTE CONF
like doing that and the big companies.
So the Facebook's and the Microsofts and the whatever your
NOTE CONF
favourite tech giant of the year is actually put quite
a lot of money into solving sat fast because they
NOTE CONF
use it all the time.
Okay, any questions about what we've done?
NOTE CONF
Probably takes a little while to sink in, and you
might need to think about why it was useful to
NOTE CONF
do, but a lot of the time it makes finding
satisfying assignment doable when otherwise it wouldn't be.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I have half an hour.
I now want to switch to a case where finding
NOTE CONF
a satisfying assignment is maybe not so hard.
So let's think about slightly simpler formulae.
NOTE CONF
If you've got a formula in CNF, then it's an
and of ORS.
NOTE CONF
Suppose we say let's only stick to nice small formulae.
So over here on the CNF, I was CNF.
NOTE CONF
I had two variables on each side.
So I actually have three variables in each clause.
NOTE CONF
But suppose I was actually really restrictive and said I'm
going to write down formulae that are in CNF.
NOTE CONF
So the end of bunch of ORS.
But every clause is an order of only two variables,
NOTE CONF
not three.
Do you think it might be easier to find a
NOTE CONF
satisfying assignment for such things?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
I wouldn't be asking otherwise, would I?
Because otherwise it wouldn't be very interesting.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's actually much easier.
So if you think about it a bit.
NOTE CONF
Well, maybe quite a lot.
You will see eventually that you can find a satisfying
NOTE CONF
assignment in linear time.
It's really about looking for contradictions.
NOTE CONF
We're not going to go into um, direct direct algorithm
for, for that.
NOTE CONF
But what we're going to do is think of this
as a gateway into another problem, which is sometimes important,
NOTE CONF
which is not so much.
Is there a satisfying assignment as how many satisfying assignments
NOTE CONF
are there, for example, timetabling problem, how many different timetables
are there?
NOTE CONF
Not something you want to know, but in other cases,
you might want to know how many solutions there are.
NOTE CONF
And I'm going to be quite honest with you here.
The topic of the next half hour is something that
NOTE CONF
is here primarily because Mike Foreman partly invented it and
really likes it, and he gave a nice party on
NOTE CONF
Wednesday, so I'm feeling nice towards him.
So I shall continue to tell you about our accounting
NOTE CONF
rule.
It's quite cute.
NOTE CONF
So it's a nice little mathematical exercise.
Um, but when do formulae like this arise?
NOTE CONF
If you have a formula that has two variables, then
it's maybe not terribly complicated, but it's the kind of
NOTE CONF
thing that happens a lot when you're writing rules about
things.
NOTE CONF
Um, how many of you had difficulty choosing your outside
courses?
NOTE CONF
How many of you had difficulty working out whether you
are allowed to take an outside course, right?
NOTE CONF
Um, the DRP is quite interesting because it has prerequisites
and co requisite constraints that are actually expressed in disguised
NOTE CONF
propositional logic.
Um, and here is a non Edinburgh version of this.
NOTE CONF
At this point I've forgotten what some of these words
mean but never mind.
NOTE CONF
Um so a formula like that might be a description
of a timetable in an institution, which I'm sure you
NOTE CONF
can guess where it says you can't take astrology and
pyromancer at the same time.
NOTE CONF
And if you take Bella mansi, you must take Cairo
Mansi, and you must take either astrology or Bella mansi.
NOTE CONF
And if you take Cairo Mansi, you must take dream
interpretation and so on.
NOTE CONF
Um, you might think that our course prerequisites and co
requisites are not as absurd as this, but sometimes they
NOTE CONF
can be because when different schools are dreaming up different
restrictions, they would like to put on people, you get
NOTE CONF
some quite complex messes.
Um, those of you who are fanatical about these things
NOTE CONF
will now be on your phones.
Just out of idle curiosity, is there anybody who already
NOTE CONF
knew what all these things mean?
Last year there was.
NOTE CONF
Which was deeply worrying.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, I think Bella mansi is shooting arrows and seeing
how far they go, but I may be confused.
NOTE CONF
Um, so if that's a bunch of rules about what
courses you can take, how can you find out which
NOTE CONF
courses you can take?
You're looking for a satisfying assignment.
NOTE CONF
Now, a nice thing about two variable clauses is that
we can turn things into implications.
NOTE CONF
What I've got here is a bunch of.
What's this?
NOTE CONF
This is a forbidden, correct forbidden combination.
This is a prerequisite.
NOTE CONF
This is a forced choice.
You must take one of something and so on.
NOTE CONF
But remember that implies is defined in terms of or
and not.
NOTE CONF
And similarly we can define and and or in terms
of not and implies.
NOTE CONF
So I can rewrite all these clauses so that they
have implications in them.
NOTE CONF
Now why would I do that.
That doesn't seem like a useful thing to do.
NOTE CONF
But you'll see that it has a benefit, at least
for this piece of mathematical fun.
NOTE CONF
You should check that I have converted this formula correctly
into a bunch of implications, just to check A or
NOTE CONF
B Well, A or B is um.
The same as A, not a implies B, because not
NOTE CONF
A implies B is the same as B or not.
Not a, which is the same as b or a.
NOTE CONF
If you remember back to your Venn diagrams, then there's
some symmetry here which we could exploit, but we don't
NOTE CONF
need to talk about that today.
What's the point?
NOTE CONF
Why is implication a nice operator?
Implication is a nice operator because it's transitive.
NOTE CONF
If I know that b entails.
So b implies c and c implies d, then I
NOTE CONF
know that b implies d.
This is something that we've seen since week one, right?
NOTE CONF
In different variations.
If these were sequence this would be the Barbara rule.
NOTE CONF
But now we're working at the level of proposition And
there it's called modus ponens if you're a traditional logician.
NOTE CONF
But it just says the obvious thing is true.
Um, no, because implication is transitive.
NOTE CONF
I can now start drawing diagrams of the various variables
in the whole formula, with implication lines between them.
NOTE CONF
So if I look at this formula, I know that
b implies c because it says so there.
NOTE CONF
And I know that c implies d because it says
so there.
NOTE CONF
And I know that d implies not b because it
says so there.
NOTE CONF
And I know that false implies anything, and I know
that anything implies true because that's just the way things
NOTE CONF
behave.
What does this tell me?
NOTE CONF
If I've got this chain of things, what do I
learn About the the variables, or rather the literals mentioned
NOTE CONF
in it.
For example, if C is true, what do I know
NOTE CONF
about the other variables in the chain?
D must be true because c implies d.
NOTE CONF
And because d implies not b and c implies d
implies not b.
NOTE CONF
I know that if something is true, then everything to
the right of it has to be true.
NOTE CONF
So setting one variable true automatically sets a whole bunch
of it.
NOTE CONF
Sorry, your your way around a whole bunch of variables
to the right, true and symmetrically.
NOTE CONF
Everything to the left of a false variable must be
false.
NOTE CONF
So if I make this variable true, then everything over
there.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
I make this variable false.
NOTE CONF
Everything over there must be false.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So I know something about the relationship.
But what I know is that if I look at
NOTE CONF
this chain somewhere, it switches from things being false to
things being true.
NOTE CONF
There's one point where there's a switch, because everything to
the left of that point is false, and everything to
NOTE CONF
the right of that point is true.
So that's made the whole problem of finding an assignment
NOTE CONF
much simpler.
I also know something because I've got a B here
NOTE CONF
and not be here.
What do I know about B from its position in
NOTE CONF
the graph?
It must be zero.
NOTE CONF
If b implies not b, that means not.
B has to be truer than be.
NOTE CONF
So not be.
Has to be true and B has to be false.
NOTE CONF
So the chain of implication there has told me quite
a bit about the variables just by looking at a
NOTE CONF
simple graph.
And of course I also know that if c is
NOTE CONF
true, d is true.
Um.
NOTE CONF
What should I do with the things I haven't mentioned
yet?
NOTE CONF
Well, we're going to think about those in a moment.
But if I've got this partial graph and I'm looking
NOTE CONF
for a satisfying assignment, then I know that there aren't
so many of them.
NOTE CONF
If I look at this chain, I know that it
has to switch from being false to true somewhere.
NOTE CONF
Maybe it switches there.
No, I can't have that because I know B has
NOTE CONF
to be false.
Okay, so maybe it switches there.
NOTE CONF
So I have a satisfying assignment that goes false true
true true.
NOTE CONF
Or I could have one that goes false false true
true.
NOTE CONF
Or perhaps I could have one that goes false false
false true.
NOTE CONF
So the lesson here is that I can find and
even count satisfying assignments by looking at this graph and
NOTE CONF
trying to cut it in half.
So find choosing some point where I can draw a
NOTE CONF
boundary between everything that is false, that goes to the
left, and everything that is true to go to the
NOTE CONF
right.
So that does two things.
NOTE CONF
It gives me a satisfying assignment, and it even lets
me count how many satisfying assignments there are, which is
NOTE CONF
occasionally useful.
Okay, so that's the simple case.
NOTE CONF
Any questions on what we're doing there?
I'll go on to a slightly more complicated case.
NOTE CONF
So what this is about is a general generalisable rule.
If I give you a formula, you can turn it
NOTE CONF
into a bunch of.
If I give you a formula where every clause has
NOTE CONF
just two variables in it, you can turn all those
clauses into implications.
NOTE CONF
Then you can draw this diagram.
And then just by using your human intuition, you can
NOTE CONF
draw lines through the diagram and chop it into two
halves a true half and a false half.
NOTE CONF
So this is something that might cause the arrow rule.
If we draw out the full graph of implications, and
NOTE CONF
then we try to cut the graph in half.
Such that everything below the line is false and everything
NOTE CONF
above the line is true.
We will get a satisfying assignment for the formula.
NOTE CONF
There are, of course, a few catches that we have
to think about.
NOTE CONF
So let's look at an example.
Here's a little formula.
NOTE CONF
Not R or q and not r or s.
If I turn that into implications it says r implies
NOTE CONF
q and r implies s.
What does the graph look like?
NOTE CONF
Well we've got two disconnected things here.
So this tells us that our implies Q and this
NOTE CONF
tells us that our implies S.
But nothing in the formula connects q and S in
NOTE CONF
any way.
So we don't know anything about the relation between q
NOTE CONF
and s.
So there are no lines between them.
NOTE CONF
And always zero implies everything, and everything implies one or
true.
NOTE CONF
So what we're looking for is ways to cut the
graph in half such that one is above it and
NOTE CONF
zero is below it, and then everything that lies above
the cut is true, and everything that lies below the
NOTE CONF
cut is false.
Um, how many ways are there to do that in
NOTE CONF
this graph?
Do I see 5.5?
NOTE CONF
Let's hope that that's right, because right now I can't
count.
NOTE CONF
Anybody want to go for another number just in case?
Let's see what we get.
NOTE CONF
So we can cut across the top, making everything fall
so that works.
NOTE CONF
We can cut down there making these two things false.
That's three we can cut.
NOTE CONF
They're making just are false.
And there's the fifth.
NOTE CONF
So we could make everything true.
And all of those are satisfying assignments because of the
NOTE CONF
way the implication graph is drawn.
So this is a kind of graphical intuitive way not
NOTE CONF
only to find assignments, but to count how many there
are.
NOTE CONF
There are, should you wish to know that.
So I think it looks a bit more impressive with
NOTE CONF
a more dramatic example.
So let's have a more complex formula.
NOTE CONF
Um, this one has one, two, three, four, five clauses.
And if I draw it out again we get a
NOTE CONF
implies b.
B implies c, c implies d.
NOTE CONF
So I've got a chain going up there.
And then I've got a to e and e to
NOTE CONF
D.
So I've got a chain going there.
NOTE CONF
These two chains come together at D.
So it's going to unify at the top.
NOTE CONF
And now again the question is how many cuts are
there again without cheating.
NOTE CONF
How many do we get.
Somebody said eight.
NOTE CONF
I'm not going to count because why should I count
when I've got the answer in a few slides?
NOTE CONF
Anybody go for anything other than eight?
So that one.
NOTE CONF
That one.
And that one.
NOTE CONF
So that's one cut that goes above de and then
cuts across the Pentagon.
NOTE CONF
You can imagine that you can actually compute these by
looking at this shape.
NOTE CONF
I know that this has three things three steps on
this side and two on this side.
NOTE CONF
So they're going to be six ways to cut that.
And then there's the one that cuts below that.
NOTE CONF
Um if you think this is too simple then the
textbook has an even more complicated example.
NOTE CONF
But I don't particularly wish to do a more complicated
example of this kind of counting.
NOTE CONF
So you get the idea here.
If I gave you a random bunch of formulae, you
NOTE CONF
could draw it out and you could count this, you
might get it wrong because it's humans counting.
NOTE CONF
But the idea should work.
But there are a bunch of things that I haven't
NOTE CONF
talked about.
So back on the very first example, there was an
NOTE CONF
A and A, not A in it.
And I haven't talked about that.
NOTE CONF
I've given you easy cases where everything is positive.
There aren't any nots here.
NOTE CONF
So if I go back to the first formula.
I've got a formula that originally had a, not a.
NOTE CONF
And by the time I'd converted everything into implications, then
the nots disappeared.
NOTE CONF
But I ended up with not B's instead.
So now I have a implies B and a implies
NOTE CONF
not B.
Um, what does that tell us?
NOTE CONF
Fe implies B and A implies not be a must
be false because at least one of B and not
NOTE CONF
be as false.
And if A implies false, then it must be false.
NOTE CONF
How can we turn that into a kind of graphical
rule?
NOTE CONF
So if I draw the implication chain in the way
that I did on the previous slide, it looks as
NOTE CONF
if we have all these cuts, but I can't have
a cut that gives B and not be the same
NOTE CONF
value.
So if I cut across here, this cut here, that's
NOTE CONF
not going to work because that would make both B
and not be false.
NOTE CONF
And if I cut below here that would make both
B and not be true.
NOTE CONF
And that doesn't work either.
So I have to be careful about what my idea
NOTE CONF
of a valid cut is.
So on the previous slide, I said that valid cuts
NOTE CONF
have to separate zero and one, but they also have
to separate any two complementary literals.
NOTE CONF
So the only cuts that survive this filter are that
one because that separates B and not be that one
NOTE CONF
which separates B and not b, and that one which
separates b and not b.
NOTE CONF
And so that gives us three cuts, three different satisfying
assignments.
NOTE CONF
Um, and that works in general for dealing with complementary
literals as long as things aren't too complicated.
NOTE CONF
I mentioned that we have some symmetry here.
If you remember back to your Venn diagrams a or
NOTE CONF
not be sorry, A implies not B is the same
as B implies, not a.
NOTE CONF
So sometimes we can actually get rid of some of
the complimentary literals and make life easier.
NOTE CONF
But not always.
That's just a sideline.
NOTE CONF
Um, can things get more complicated?
I mean, I've drawn graphs which are nicely going up,
NOTE CONF
right?
Which is how you would like a graph to go
NOTE CONF
up.
But is there any reason you can't have a graph
NOTE CONF
with a loop in it?
So there's a formula A implies b, b implies c,
NOTE CONF
c implies not A, not a implies d, d implies
a.
NOTE CONF
If I try to draw that.
Then I have a graph with implication loops in it.
NOTE CONF
What can I say about loops in a graph.
So I've got a implies b implies c implies not
NOTE CONF
a implies d implies a.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
That tells me a lot about these things because they
must all have the same value.
NOTE CONF
Because if I had a true anywhere in it, the
cycle would mean that the true has to propagate all
NOTE CONF
the way through.
If there's a false, then it's okay, because false implies
NOTE CONF
false.
So as soon as I have a cycle, I can
NOTE CONF
just say all these things have the same value.
And that restricts still further the range of things that
NOTE CONF
I can count of as valid ways to cut the
diagram in half.
NOTE CONF
If I take a cut, it must not cut any
cycle in half.
NOTE CONF
Um, now, in this particular cycle, I've got a knot.
So what does that mean?
NOTE CONF
I mean.
I have to make a and not a the same.
NOTE CONF
You can't make a and not a the same.
So if you see a cycle which has two complementary
NOTE CONF
things in it, you know that there is no satisfying
assignment for this formula.
NOTE CONF
So that's the first time in this technique that we've
found a proof that the formula is not satisfiable, which
NOTE CONF
is a useful thing to know.
So as I said this stuff is not important.
NOTE CONF
So please don't stress about it.
You don't need to remember it beyond doing the exercises
NOTE CONF
about it.
But it is quite fun.
NOTE CONF
And if you do a bit of googling around, you'll
find some slightly related stuff.
NOTE CONF
There are algorithms that do a similar thing, and there's
some other stuff, so the book has more about it.
NOTE CONF
I'm choosing not to tell you more of the stuff
in the book, because after all, this is not all
NOTE CONF
that useful.
It's just a bit of fun.
NOTE CONF
But sometimes you can get rid of cycles.
And let me summarise what we've done and say a
NOTE CONF
little bit about the point of tue-sat and introduce one
final piece of complexity.
NOTE CONF
So what I've said is that if you take a
clause that is in tue-sat form, so every clause has
NOTE CONF
just two literals in it, we can turn all the
clauses into implications.
NOTE CONF
We can draw a nice graph, we can define a
notion of valid cut, and that lets us both find
NOTE CONF
and count satisfying assignments.
Valid cuts had separate zero and one.
NOTE CONF
They had two separate complementary literals.
And that and they had not to cut a cycle.
NOTE CONF
Um, what are the applications of counting two satisfying assignments?
So there's some theoretical stuff which I don't know much
NOTE CONF
about, but there are applications in statistical physics and allegedly
in artificial intelligence, although I haven't yet found those.
NOTE CONF
And if you're doing CSS and physics a few.
So at some point you may choose to do statistical
NOTE CONF
physics.
I don't know whether you have to do you have
NOTE CONF
to do statistical physics?
No.
NOTE CONF
Are you going to maybe.
Um, statistical physics is quite a strange subject because it
NOTE CONF
applies some quite heavy maths to physics.
But there's a difference in the way physicists do maths
NOTE CONF
than the way mathematicians do maths.
And sometimes this causes some friction.
NOTE CONF
Um.
There's one complication that I haven't mentioned about.
NOTE CONF
And if any of you feel inclined to play around
with this, then you will have to go and look
NOTE CONF
at the book.
I have only given you graphs that I can draw
NOTE CONF
on a flat piece of paper without crossing planar graphs.
Um, there are graphs which you cannot draw on a
NOTE CONF
flat piece of paper.
How would you deal with it?
NOTE CONF
Well, there are ways, but the book will let you
deal with that.
NOTE CONF
And I think this is quite enough about the arrow
rule.
NOTE CONF
It is rather cute.
It's a bit of fun.
NOTE CONF
There is one little exercise on the tutorial for you
to do some arrow counting, but it should not be
NOTE CONF
too challenging.
So what happens next?
NOTE CONF
Well, we've been moving slowly from looking just at logic
to doing computational things with logic.
NOTE CONF
And the next step is to do some computational things
without thinking about logic.
NOTE CONF
Although a true logician will say that everything is logic.
So I may be doing computation in the next couple
NOTE CONF
of weeks, but it's just logic in disguise.
But we'll look at it as computation and I give
NOTE CONF
you two minutes back.
Any final questions?
NOTE CONF
Piazza is there.
Um, hopefully the tutorial will be relatively painless.
NOTE CONF
Next one after this will be slightly less painless, I'm
afraid.
NOTE CONF
But I have to make you work.
Sometimes.
NOTE CONF